right so this talk is called cosmic dawn
and destiny and so we're going to be
talking about the Big Bang again and
we're also going to be talking about the
potential end of the universe so we're
looking at the beginnings and the
endings and what we can know about them
and how we know about it and what we
might not know about some of these
features and there's some bang up to
date information right at the end which
we'll get to so let's get going
the first thing that this talk really is
fundamentally based on is the idea that
mass bends space and that
as Einstein showed gravity bends space
really gravity is the effect of bent
space so we have a satellite orbiting
around the earth and from the satellites
point of view it's traveling in the
shortest straight line it can it's just
that it's traveling in space that is
being curved by the earth and Einstein
produced this theory and had to teach
himself a whole lot of new mathematics
about how to do equations on curved
surfaces and came out in the end with an
equation which is terrifyingly
complicated to do anything with but
actually here it is and in its overall
global forum this is Einstein's equation
of general relativity now there's some
characters and some mumbo-jumbo in there
but let's some explain what's going on
so where it says G a B or alpha beta
that is a value that represents the
curvature of space-time it's like the
way of defining the shape and it's
actually a four by four grid of numbers
and each number tells you something
about how the dimensions of space and
time
so three dimensions of space and one of
time so it's a four by four grid and
eight each entry in that grid tells you
the effect and the amount of curvature
that's going on between one dimension
and another in in pairs then the same
thing is happening on the right-hand
side where it's got T alpha beta that's
another of these four by four grids that
represents the distribution of mass and
energy
in space and so you can represent where
things are and how fast they're moving
and how much energy they've got in the
various of the 16 cells in this grid
okay but you don't need to worry about
that all that detail and actually
they're bit in the middle they're equals
and 8 pi G over C to the power 4 is also
very simple 8 just a number PI that
number that turns up in there anything
to do with circles G straight from
Newton from his formula for gravity and
see the speed of light which is of
course very fundamental to everything to
do with relativity because it's the only
thing that's always constant so C is a
constant it's the maximum velocity of
the speed of light and of course it's
raised to the fourth power because there
are four dimensions that's why so very
very easy and what it's really telling
us is that the curvature of space-time
the G is equal to and
determined by the distribution of energy
and vice-versa
now actually we can immediately solve
this let's have an empty universe in an
empty universe there's no mass or any
energy so te alpha beta is a whole load
of zeros and so 0 times the constants
gives us G alpha beta on the left must
also be zero so if you have an empty
universe there's no curvature there you
go we've solved Einstein's general
theory of relativity equations and
wasn't that easy very unpainted
there's a problem because if you put any
other number other than zero for the
amount of matter or energy in T on the
right there then it predicts that the
curvature of the universe will be
positive and inwards and the whole
universe will collapse so an empty
universe is fine it'll sit there doing
nothing but as soon as you have a non
empty universe it's going to fall in on
itself and that falling in on itself is
gravity okay so there you go we've
solved that as well really that that G
on the right is indeed the strength of
gravity the amount of curvature it's the
same thing oh there is another case I
said that T was the distribution of mass
and energy what if we start off with
everything all the matter flying apart
so that it's it's got mass and it's got
lots of energy and their energy is all
directed outwards well you can do that
and have the equation balanced so that
an expanding
universe flying apart is perfectly okay
and you will get the the contribution
from mass on the T side and the energy
on T side can cancel out and you can
still end up with zero and therefore a
nice flat piece of space and that will
allow the universe to expand forever and
that's approximately what we thought our
universe looked like with a very flat
organization of space and a balance
between mass and outward flying energy
from expansion
and so if you think if there is an
expanding universe then you have to
think well where did it come from and
you run the film backwards basic
depending it must have been smaller in
the past and if we do that looking at
our universe today we get an age of the
universe of 13.8 billion years and we've
talked about this in a couple of my
other talks about how big the universe
is and so on us all goes back to a
single point that contained all space
and all matter and all energy in a zero
volume right at the beginning and this
was first suggested by this chap George
Lemaitre who is a professor of physics
and a priest and he derived Hubble's law
of expansion by looking at just the
logic that we've been considering so far
from those equations saying that the
only non empty stable case was actually
an expanding universe and therefore
predicting that that's what we would
find given that we find the universe is
not empty and of course
this in the talk about the Big Bang as
well this is fred hoyle going on the
radio and actually coining the term big
bang for the first time and saying that
he didn't think very much of the idea
because he had his own theory about the
way that the universe was and that it
didn't start 13.8 billion years ago in
this hot dense state died air was that
there was expansion but that the
expansion was searched that as the
galaxies moved apart new matter was
being formed inside the gaps in the new
space and so an exactly equivalent
picture would results you would have the
same distribution of galaxies a billion
years ago as you do now and the same
distribution a billion years from now
with new ones filling in the spaces
between them it's filling in the gap
right here would it mean that's universe
infinitely old and therefore you could
avoid the problem of what happened right
at the beginning but if it was
infinitely old always have looked
roughly as it does now with the same
distribution of matter and we talked
about that in the talk about how big is
the universe so Einstein actually then
decided based on all of this that he
needed to make his equations more
flexible
and he added an extra term you can see
it on the right there he's added in
minus lambda this magic number the Greek
letter lambda which he called the
cosmological constant it's a just
another constant you might say fudge
factor that allows the equation to
balance in circumstances where there is
a nonzero amount of mass and energy and
you can still end up with flat space
because effectively if you make lambda
equal to 8 pi G over C to the power 4
times T alpha beta then those two terms
cancel out and you get zero and
therefore you get flat space now what
that lambda corresponds to is kind of an
anti-gravity force a repulsive pressure
that causes space just by its existence
to resist gravity even if there is no
mass
but there's problems with this for the
universe to be stable in the long run as
was being expected by many people the
value of the constant has to be just
right it has to be just so that lambda
and the other terms on the right-hand
side there the 8 pi G over C to the 4t
alpha beta have to cancel out exactly
and of course even if they do that
the slightest oh the distribution of
mass energy in the universe inside t
alpha beta would push it out of balance
and so the flapping of a butterfly's
wings would be enough to cause a runaway
collapse or a runaway expansion of the
universe and clearly that silly
mikasa eventually proved the universe
really was expanding exactly as per
jewish lemaitre's prediction he saw that
the galaxies were all getting to move
away from us and they were moving away
from us faster and faster the further
into the distance they were and so
actually that means you don't need to
have a pure steady state and you can
have this expansion and the gradual
thinning out of the matter in the
universe as time goes on and therefore
you don't need this cosmological
constant and Einstein actually described
it as his greatest blunder introducing
it of course
the expansion of the universe and the
idea of the Big Bang was then backed up
by these two guys Penzias and Wilson
with their horn antenna when they
discovered the microwave radiation
coming from all over the sky that called
the Cosmic Microwave Background which is
the afterglow from a hot early universe
and it was hot it was a probably about
4,000 degrees when the radiation was
emitted but it's cooled down and being
cooled by the expansion the expansion
has stretched the wavelength of the
radiation making it cooler and cooler
because long wave radiation is much
cooler than highly energetic shortwave
radiation and so it's now 2 point 7
degrees rather than the same temperature
as the surface of a star so it's good
evidence that the universe expanded from
a hotter state
we have this photograph the Hubble Deep
Field which shows what the sky in an
apparently empty patch near Cygnus just
off the side of the Milky Way looks like
if you use the Hubble Space Telescope
for a whole month to photograph it and
you see galaxy after galaxy after galaxy
in fact apart from one star down at the
bottom we see mostly galaxies and they
get fainter and fainter and redder and
redder the further out you look and as
you're looking at things that are
further away you are of course looking
back in time because you're looking
using the light which takes time to
travel through space and it's quite fast
300,000 km/s but nevertheless the
distances we're talking about some of
the galaxies in this picture the light
took 12 billion years to arrive at the
camera but beyond 12 billion years of
look-back time we see nothing in the
optical we see darkness and that's not
because the telescope wasn't sensitive
enough it is because that was before
there were any galaxies and so the it's
called the cosmic Dark Age before the
first stars even and it's between the
Big Bang at 13.8 billion and around 12
billion when the first stars lit up once
they gradually pulled themselves
together again after gravity had done
its work and so I'm afraid that's we can
say about Fred Hoyle that he was wrong
because the old universe that we're
looking at way back at the dawn of time
there does not look like the current
universe so that steady state theory is
definitely wrong and shown to be so by
that one picture
so we're pretty sure that things started
as a big bang now let's whiz back all
the way to the Big Bang and in fact
spend some time not considering the 13.8
billion years since but let's first take
a look at the first three minutes of the
existence of the universe
that's zooming in in terms of time with
some distance adorable amount isn't it
so the first three minutes before we do
that the universe today the headlines
would be that there are four forces in
nature gravity electromagnetism the weak
nuclear force and the strong nuclear
force and scientists have two theories
that describe everything general
relativity which describes the first of
those gravity and quantum mechanics
which covers the other three our biggest
problem in theoretical physics is trying
to make those two into one theory that
fits everything and that's been a
challenge for 50 years or more so right
back at the beginning in the first 10 to
the minus 44 of a second space was less
than 10 to the minus 35 meters across
these numbers are the Planck time 10 to
the minus 44 seconds and the Planck
length 10 to the minus 35 meters and the
ratio between them is the speed of light
the that you would find that light could
travel one Planck length in one Planck
time unit so it was a tiny little thing
of course
all of the energy and matter being
packed so closely together creates an
enormous amount of gravitational
curvature of the space and of time in
fact it becomes so complicated and
entangled that it's really a chaotic
foam there's a way of thinking about it
so chaotic is it that there aren't
really any clear notions of the
difference between here and there or now
and then or before and after these
concepts of the difference between space
and time really don't mean anything in
this very very first instant of time or
instant of the existence of the universe
so this is called Planck epoch and it's
the time when all four of the forces
gravity the strong nuclear force the
weak force and electromagnetism were all
combined as one unified single entity
and the whole universe is a
gravitational singularity essentially a
massive highly energetic quantum black
hole now we can say all of this we can't
do the maths because our equations blow
up in our face at this level so this is
a strong hypothesis rather than what you
might call a solid theory so what
happened next
oh for some unknown reason expansion
kicks in and this is really the big bang
starting and if you want to know what
caused the Big Bang then unfortunately
you probably need a philosopher or a
priest to answer the question rather
than a scientist at this point because
we have no idea what we do believe
though is that the expansion kicked in
and gravity emerged because space-time
emerged from the chaos the other fourth
the other three forces remained unified
and the universe was just a soup of
energy with a temperature of 10 to the
power 32 degrees Kelvin so hot that
everything was flying around and there
was so much energy that no particle was
able to condense at this temperature it
would be destroyed by an interaction as
soon as it did
and so around 10 to the minus 37 of a
second after the Big Bang so that's
quite a few Planck times later if you
work it out we've gone from 10 to the
minus 44 to 10 to the minus 37 that's an
increase in time of a factor of 10
million and the expansion has cooled the
universe down to a temperature of only
10 to the power 28 degrees Kelvin and at
this point the universe underwent some
sort of phase change which gave it a
huge kick which scientists call
inflation which was an idea from Alan
Guth back in the late 70s which
suggested that the universe suddenly
began expanding because of this what he
calls a false vacuum state which is a
little bit too complicated to explain
but it's something changed and caused
this inflation to kick off and then 10
times further into the universe at 10 to
the minus 36 of a second the temperature
dropped enough with the expansion that
the strong nuclear force was able to
separate away from the electro magnetic
and weak forces leaving those two
combined and that's another example of
these phase changes that gives the
universe a further push in expansion you
can think of a phase change as what
happens when you boil your kettle you
make the water turn into steam water
vapor it's changing phase from the
liquid phase to the gas phase and you
have to put energy in in that case but
if you stick your hand over the top of
the kettle while this is happening and I
wouldn't recommend you try it you'll
burn your hand on the steam because the
steam will reekin dense it'll undergo
the energy dropping phase change and
release a vast amount
heat into your hand and burn it and it's
these downward dropping phase changes in
the early universe that we're talking
about so it's as if the universe was
condensing from a more volatile to a
less volatile state so a word about
inflation and why we think it was there
we think it increased the size of the
universe at an enormous rate in this
very short time period between 10 to the
minus 37 and 10 to the minus 32 seconds
they increased the extent of the
universe by a factor of 10 to the power
26 an absolutely enormous number and we
believe that because of the cosmic
microwave background radiation that we
observe being so nearly perfectly smooth
the idea is that in the inflation
expanding the universe by such an
enormous amount effectively ironed out
all the quantum ripples that they would
have been that would have existed on
quite small time size scales to exist
over much larger size scales and
therefore up here nearly flat much as
the ant on the balloon here as the
balloon begins to be inflated the ant
can see the curvature of the surface of
the balloon but if you blew the balloon
up to the size of the universe then the
ant can't see that the surface is in
fact curved it looks flat to it it's the
same idea and again the temperature is
always dropping as the universe expands
so when air down to 10 to the 22 kelvins
there is an issue that's associated with
with this and what why we believe that
inflation solves it and that is that
again the cosmic microwave background
radiation has the same temperature all
over the sky and it's as if somehow it
all got together and agreed what
temperature it was going to be at now
normally heat flows from hot regions to
cold regions and equalizes the
temperature but it can only do that at a
speed an absolute maximum if it's being
carried by radiation at the speed of
light that's the maximum rate at which
heat can flow from one hot part of the
universe to a cold part and so hot
regions and cold regions that were too
far apart would not be able to reach an
equilibrium and end up at the same
temperature and the way that inflation
solves this is saying are yes but they
were all able to spend long enough
together when the universe was very very
tiny to get into equilibrium and then
inflation carried the regions apart so
that they
made to be all the same temperature when
they were very close together and then
carried outside of the range of a speed
of light based temperature equal
equivalence building process I hope
that's clear
so those really why we believe in
inflation so I'm going to skip forwards
to ten to the minus twelve to ten to the
minus six seconds and these time units
actually have names they're a picosecond
for ten to the minus twelve and ten to
the minus nine is a microsecond and
microseconds are starting to get into
almost as a sensibly short period of
time that we worry about it's the same
sort of time as one clock tick of the
chip in your mobile phone one
microsecond so these are things we deal
with every day these days
but during this period the weak force
and the electromagnetic force is
decoupled from each other they're
coupled when the temperature is very
very high
but as they temperature falls and things
start moving around more slowly you
start to be able to see another of these
phase changes and the forces become
distinguishable and the universe then
fills with quarks the components of
protons and neutrons at ten to the minus
six at one microsecond the temperature
is now low enough for the quarks to
start sticking together to make things
much more familiar in the form of the
protons and the neutrons that go to
build atoms that we are ourselves made
of and so the universe from one
microsecond onwards is much more
familiar to us than the rather peculiar
states from earlier epochs we have the
four forces all separated and we have
matter in the form of neutrons and
protons and of course there are
electrons involved as well and so things
then are quite familiar and in fact
picked three minutes the rest of the
three minutes that I'm talking about we
just see the expansion lowering the
temperature
and the universe is full of a hot plasma
of protons and neutrons flying around
but as the temperature drops and reaches
ten to the nine degrees Kelvin that's
one billion degrees it's now such that
the energy of the particles allows
nuclear fusion to work
is above a billion and you find that the
energy the particles is so vast that the
products of nuclear fusion the helium at
the bottom of the diagram there get
destroyed by other particles hitting
them faster than they're made so you
don't really get anywhere but below a
billion degrees you're talking about the
sort of temperature that occurs in the
middle of the largest stars and fusion
can run and runs quite quickly driving
the hydrogen to form deuterium helium 3
and helium 4 as shown on the diagram and
then expansion is continuing by the time
you get to three minutes
the
jurors dropped below ten million degrees
and now the universe is too cold for
fusion to begin the hydrogen at the top
there needs a temperature of at least 10
million in order to be moving fast
enough for the fusion to deuterium the
second step to occur and so once the
three minutes is up and the temperature
cools down you've now got a temperature
and a density lower than the core of the
smallest type of star the red dwarf star
and fusion switches off so you get this
burst of 3 minutes of pressure-cooker
action making hydrogen into the slightly
heavier elements and in fact the full
diagram is is here we get protons and
neutrons at the bottom P and N and they
turn into the isotopes of hydrogen
deuterium and tritium D and T those can
turn into helium 3 and helium 4 and all
the arrows represent different possible
paths that that can take on the diagram
depending on what collides with what and
that's indicated in the little brackets
there so where it says P comma gamma
that's a proton hitting something and a
gamma-ray emerging that's what that
means and you can see that it also
starts to try to build elements beyond
helium so they at the very top there we
have beryllium 7 and we've also got
lithium-7 up there and you can see that
those can be made by taking helium 3 and
the arrow leading to beryllium 7 says
for a G so a helium four nucleus adds to
a helium 3 and gives you beryllium 7 but
then what it says is there's a downward
going arrow that that can be hit by a
neutron and give out a proton and you
end up with lithium 7
and that can be split apart again by
being hit by a proton and fish and back
into two helium's so there's a sort of
cycle that goes on and so you don't get
much lithium or beryllium made by this
process because you only get the little
tiny amounts that happen to be in play
in that cycle when the music stopped at
three minutes and the temperature got
lower enough for all these reactions not
to be possible and so it left the
universe with 75 percent hydrogen 24
percent helium and a very small amount
of some of the other elements that just
were the intermediate products of these
cycles and sort of froze out when the
music stopped
so now we move on in rather a big jump
to 378 thousand years after the Big Bang
when the temperature is now cooled from
that where we left it at 10 million
degrees at 3 minutes down to 4000
degrees and we have a universe made of
75% hydrogen
24% helium and a little bit of
everything else remember but it's still
at a temperature above which the
electrons can't stick to the atoms the
energy pervading the universe is still
too high it's above the ionization and
energy and so the nuclei and the
electrons are whizzing around as a soup
but at 4000 degrees the electrons
suddenly start to stick they can be
captured to form neutral hydrogen atoms
and indeed neutral helium as well and
there's a fundamental difference between
a soup of ionized nuclei and electrons
called a plasma and the neutral atoms
forming a gas and that is that the gas
is transparent and the plasma won't let
light flow through it because the light
keeps hitting all these charged
particles and getting scattered and so
suddenly the light the whole universe
turns transparent and the light released
flows out through every aspect of the
universe in a straight line and we when
we look back with our telescopes in fact
with our radio telescopes we see this as
the cosmic microwave background
radiation pervading every direction and
coming from that last moment when the
universe was as hot as the outside
layers of a star
when we look at the Cosmic Microwave
Background in detail we see actually
different frequencies coming out with
different intensities and it's shown in
this chart here and it has this
characteristic shape this slightly
skewed distribution with a nice smooth
curve and the little red crosses are
those measured by the Cosmic Microwave
Background Explorer satellite so those
are the measured data and the Green Line
is the theory that says what a pure
black body with no particular preference
for any particular elements or anything
would look like and says is what our
plasma would give off and it's a perfect
fit as you can see and the peak at the
top there is what we use to tell us the
equivalent temperature because that peak
changes if you make a plasma glow at
different temperatures the shape of the
curve stays the same but the position of
the peak just moves to higher and higher
energies as you increase the temperature
and so we know that the Cosmic Microwave
Background has this temperature two
point seven to five degrees above
absolute zero now I said it was emitted
as a temperature of 4,000 degrees and
what's happened to it is that as the
light has been traveling through space
which is expanding the wavelength of
that deep reddy-orange colored light
corresponding to 4,000 degrees has been
stretched the waves are all pulled to be
longer wavelengths down from red into
the infrared and then through radio and
microwave wavelengths down by a factor
of 2,000 or so which is what gives us
that temperature of 2.7 degrees now
so we're pretty sure that the Big Bang
happened and that all of that fits
together it's very strong evidence and
we can characterize the Big Bang really
rather well in terms of how much heat
and energy there was we should be able
to about what's going to happen next and
we should be able to extrapolate now
this graph here is showing various
possible scenarios we've got time going
along the bottom from the very beginning
of the universe whenever that was off to
the future and the vertical line is us
now in the present and you can see we've
plotted various possible different
colored curves let's look at the orange
one first if the universe had not got
enough mass to have sorry if the
universe had plenty of mass and not got
enough oomph not enough energy when it
was formed to overwhelm gravity then the
gravity will slow it down and so it
would start at the bottom and move
upwards in size the vertical axis is the
size of the universe until it reached
the present day but gradually be slowing
down in its expansion and then if
there's enough mass to mean that gravity
will eventually win and that the
universe doesn't essentially have escape
velocity then the curve will tip over
and go back down to some future Big
Crunch when the universe would
presumably fall all back together again
if the universe had a bit more energy
when it was launched from the Big Bang
it would follow the purple trajectory
and perhaps just coast on forever but
had a cosmological constant that lambda
parameter in Einstein's theory such that
it had this repulsive anti-gravity force
from empty space then it's likely it
would follow one of these other green
and yellow lines and those were thought
to be highly unlikely by most people we
thought what we observed was closest to
a flat trajectory and you can even
actually see that we can tell the
difference between some of these
possible paths rule some out because the
yellow one had no beginning there was no
Big Bang at all likewise the green one
was more of a static coasting Fred Hoyle
type steady-state in the first place
it's only the dark green purple and
orange ones that had a big bang and you
can even work out when that Big Bang
should have been and so now with our
modern figure of 13.8 billion years ago
we could plot that it the real answer
would be somewhere between the green
line and the purple line perhaps
what makes it very difficult is that at
the point that we are at right now all
those paths are almost flat and almost
parallel to each other passing through
right now now you might think that is
unlucky because it makes it hard to tell
the difference you might think it's a
coincidence we'll come back to that
later
so what we really need to do is be able
to measure not what the expansion is
doing right now because at now you can't
tell the difference very well as to
which course we've been on other than by
using the age of the universe and
modeling it but we can't measure it and
so what we needed to do was measure the
expansion of the universe at different
times further into the deep past to see
if we could tell which curve we had been
on and therefore predict the cosmic
density cosmic density
sorry cosmic destiny put my teeth back
in destiny do that very clever idea was
to use white dwarf stars these are the
dead non energy generating cause of old
sun-like stars that have used all of
their fuel and are sitting there cooling
slowly over eons and being held up from
further collapse by quantum electron
pressure and if you want to understand
that more I've got a talk on white
dwarfs I think I've recorded it and it's
on YouTube but these white dwarfs
they're held up from further collapse by
this quantum electron pressure but only
to a certain limit so if you have a
scenario where you have a binary star
system and the two stars are both round
about the same mass as the Sun maybe a
little bit heavier and a good case in
point is then nice bright star in the
sky in the winter the brightest star in
the sky other than the Sun serious this
has two stars and one of them was about
five solar masses and the other one is
about two solar masses the five solar
mass star has already been through its
life swollen up to form a red giant and
then puffed off its outer layers and
formed a white dwarf but the other one
is still in its or
life cycle but give it time it too will
use up its fuel it will swell up as a
red giant and when it does so it'll not
have a very strong grip on its outer
layers and the gravity of the very dense
white dwarf stars can be such as to pull
material from a red giant companion away
as shown in this artist's impression
here creating a river of material that
flows from the red giant over onto the
white dwarf and it will spiral down and
get very hot in the process in the
accretion disk as we call it and
eventually land on the surface of the
white dwarf and very badly because these
white dwarfs cannot have more mass than
1.4 for solar masses as soon as they go
above that gravity overwhelms the
electron pressure and they collapse and
then explode as a type 1a supernova as
shown in the diagram on the side here
you get the two stars one becomes a
white dwarf the second one catches up to
the red giant stage and feeds the white
dwarf till it's over its limit and it
can't be another thing and it blows up
and detonates as a type 1a supernova
here's an image of an exploding in a
distant galaxy and it's putting out as
much light as the whole of the rest of
the galaxy when it does so very very
powerful explosions but because they
explode with exactly the same mass this
1.44 solar mass limit when that's
reached they detonate it means that the
power output of them is always the same
and so we can use them as standard
candles
a standard candle of a known brightness
will appear fainter the further away it
is
in direct relation to the inverse-square
law so double the distance you'll see it
a quarter is bright multiply the
distance by five it'll go down by a
factor of twenty-five and so we can use
these super novae these type 1a
exploding white dwarfs as standard
candles because they give out a known
amount of energy and from their apparent
brightness we could figure out how far
away they are and you can see here they
all are very recognizable they have a
characteristic shape all plotted on the
left and after we've corrected them for
distance to sort out the brightness you
can see they all fit very very neatly -
giving almost exactly the same curve
there for a quite a large sample of
these type 1a supernovae and so if we
see us a type 1a supernova we can work
out how far away it must be and we can
also look at the host galaxy and measure
the overall distance to the host galaxy
by its redshift see how much the light
has been stretched by the expansion of
the universe and those two figures
combine to allow us to tell the
difference between which of these curves
we're on because we can look at some
very distant type 1a supernovae
fortunately they're very bright so we
can see them at a long way across the
universe and so it gives us an excellent
probe to look at how the universe has
been expanding and
experiment was done and published just a
turn of this century this was the data
they overlaid the redshift of the host
galaxy along the bottom and the observed
brightness of the type 1a supernovae and
you can see that they're plotted along
this diagonal line it's almost a
straight line and the two zones top left
and bottom right have been colored in
blue background means accelerating
universe pink means decelerating
possibly heading towards a Big Crunch at
some point if it's below that red line
the critical density it will go to being
a Big Crunch
so there's a little bit of a pink zone
that means it's slowing but it's never
going to come to a complete halt and
then anywhere in the blue and it's
accelerating and getting faster and
faster I'm going to fly apart ever more
quickly so the dark line going along is
the best fit through all those points
and it's in the Blue Zone which means
that the universe was accelerating and
going to rip itself apart in the future
and no one was expecting that as the
answer it's the case on the right the
case on the Left sees a universe go from
the Big Bang to a Big Crunch the next
one along is the critical universe where
it just never quite slows down and then
the one on the right there is the
accelerating universe when it suddenly
seems to take off and go ever faster
unless was they resulted in a Nobel
Prize this discovery and the explanation
given is
dark energy some mystery repulsive
anti-gravity force that must exist in
the universe that will drive the
universe to get ever faster in its
expansion they estimated how much of
this dark energy forcing the universe
apart there might be it's a staggering
amount works out at sixty eight point
three percent of the energy budget of
the universe is dark energy the rest is
physical matter mass but of the rest of
it only the orange sector is the stuff
that we are made of and that everything
we can see is made of the other 26.8% is
this other weird stuff called dark
matter and I have a talk about that
again there's a video on YouTube called
from the pendulum to dark matter if you
want an explanation of dark matter we're
going to ignore that for now but you can
see that dark energy is by far the
dominant form of energy in the whole
universe and so this was a shock and a
huge surprise to everyone but the real
question is what is it what is this dark
energy and to try and understand that we
have to have a little look at a little
bit of quantum mechanic weirdness it is
the fact that empty space never really
empty empty space sieves with
short-lived pairs of particles and
antimatter particles may borrow energy
from space time pop into existence and
then Rhian aisle eight again and pay
back the energy that they borrowed from
space-time so the question is
could this be
the energy of empty space could this be
the explanation for dark energy well if
it sounds pretty weird this quantum
vacuum effect is real it's being
measured as the Casimir effect and an
experiment predicted in 1948 and
experiments been done if you hang two
metal plates in a vacuum you get a
pressure between them caused by this
vacuum energy the energy of empty space
being different between the plates to
the amount outside of the plates for
weird and complicated reasons to do with
that what wavelengths of radiation can
fit between the plates neatly but it's a
real effect and it's been measured and
we have to take it into account in some
everyday physics as well these days so
now this was as I say predicted and
could be well if you're looking for
something that causes a an outward
pressure on empty space this could be a
candidate but when we calculate at the
amount of vacuum energy and try and make
it fit with dark energy because it all
sounds fine until you do the maths what
we found was that the pressure from
vacuum point energy came out to be too
large to account for dark energy by a
factor of ten with a hundred and twenty
zeros after it
and that's described it's the worst
estimate ever in the history of all
science and I think it's an example of
quantum mechanics and general relativity
don't like each other very much so it
might still be the explanation it's just
that we might not be getting our maths
correct for this one
so how much energy is there I said it
was 68% of the total energy budget of
the universe well we know from the
measurements of the expansion that it's
about the equivalent if you talk about
it in terms of mass you can convert
energy to mass via equals MC squared
that famous equation and roughly it's
the same as having 10 to the minus 27
kilograms per cubic meter and the mass
of a proton is about 1.6 7 times 10 to
the minus 27 kilograms so it's about the
same as having one proton in every cubic
meter of the universe that's tiny
because even the gas between the stars
which is a better vacuum than we can
make in any vacuum chamber on earth has
a million protons in every cubic meter
and so unfortunately this means it's
going to be very very difficult for us
to actually try to measure dark energy
in the laboratory because if we did
manage to make a vacuum that was a
million times better than we managed
today we'd still be several million
times short of being able to actually
measure this one remaining proton but
nevertheless because this dark energy is
everywhere across all of space it still
manages to taut up to that 68% of all
the energy budget of the universe
okay so now the weird thing that we've
noticed and this is a little bit
suspicious I think it seems that the
acceleration has only started very
recently when the universe was smaller
and all the mass was closer together
gravity would have had a stronger grip
and there was less space and so there
was less dark energy as you as the
universe creates more space as space
expands the amount of dark energy
increases and the mass is carried
further apart and so it's mutual gravity
decreases and it looks like the dark
energy is going to win eventually for
that reason
and so what it appears is that as the
expansion continued gravity looks to
have lost the battle with dark energy
well round about now actually we seem to
be at the inflection point
the destiny of the universe looks like
its ultimate fate is this ever
quickening expansion of everything
that's not already densely packed enough
for gravity to win and so that means
that the Milky Way is fine the Milky Way
and the Andromeda galaxy and our friends
in the Triangulum galaxy they're all
fine they're gravitationally bound
together and dense enough that dark
energy won't win because they the gravit
galaxies will move together and merge
and become denser faster than dark
energy ever manages to expand but the
rest of the universe will disappear ever
more quickly outside our visible horizon
beyond the point where light can travel
from it to us and be carried away from
us faster than the speed of light so
sadly all of everything that's outside
our local Group of galaxies is destined
to disappear according to this but still
if you run things further forward the
big rip will occur dark energy will
eventually become so enormous that it
will unbind the galaxy and bind all the
stars from the galaxy in the Milky Way
will fall apart and they'll all then
disappear from each other and then it
will unbind the planets from the Sun and
then eventually it'll unbind the
electrons from the atoms and tear
absolutely everything apart and this is
called the big rip it's one possible
destiny of the whole of the cosmos to be
torn apart now actually as a modern
theory by Roger Penrose about this that
this is a good thing and that once it's
happened and all of the matter particles
have been torn apart all you're left
with is radiation in an empty universe
and his theory of conformal cyclic
cosmology as it's called says that that
will lead to an
ooh big bang that's a whole other topic
so the question is is this right and
could the universe be fooling us
well since the announcement of the Nobel
Prize and the theory of dark energy one
or two things have started to crop up a
supernova study discovered this
particular one here SN L so3 d3 BB in a
galaxy far far away four billion
light-years away and it appeared to go
bang with too much mass two solar masses
more than the 1.44 of their
Chandrasekhar limit well perhaps that
particular one isn't a super
Chandrasekhar event that's breaking the
rules because perhaps it was two white
dwarfs colliding with each other each
starting with less than the
Chandrasekhar limit but combining to
produce one that was too much oh that's
okay but then there was this one in 2009
and here the light curve marked at the
top there with the little blob all on
its own on the diagram the little black
dot doesn't fit with the light curve of
a typical Chandrasekhar event a typical
type 1a supernova it appears that it was
way too bright and the latest news as
off December 2019 Cornell University
produced a paper about events like that
showing that some supernovae some type
1a supernovae vary I mean the properties
of them depend on certain properties of
the host galaxy and in particular they
depend on what they call the metallicity
of the original star that went into form
the white dwarf
now this metallicity is really a measure
of how many heavy elements there are in
the mix how much there is that's not the
hydrogen and the helium from the Big
Bang and therefore whether it's a second
or a third or a fourth generation of
stars that have got all the pollutants
the carbon the nickel the iron and the
heavy elements that get made
in the death of stars now that means
that there's a bias between older
supernovae that couldn't have been
formed out of anything except hydrogen
and helium out of first generation stars
and much more recent ones and that's
what this church are over here with the
curved lines is trying to show that
there's a bias in it which breaks the
standard candle model of type 1a
supernovae and what the worst possible
thing is it breaks it over time so it
means that the relationship changes
between the distant universe and the
modern universe and it may well be that
it changes in just the way to account
for the curving of the track implies a
shift to a trick you into thinking
you've got dark energy when in fact you
haven't so that could be quite exciting
news and there's further new news from
the group in Oxford Paris and Copenhagen
collaborating they looked at a large
sample of type 1a supernovae now the
original study used something like 60
supernovae and got them from two groups
they heis ed the distant ones they very
large redshift ones and another survey
and that's why that original chart that
I show there as some marked in red from
the high Z project and some from the
super Cosmo
supernova cosmology project marked in
orange that were to some extent but some
of them were nearer by but not only the
were they at different distances they
were actually in different directions on
the sky and the new study has looked at
740 of these exploding white dwarfs and
shown that when you look at it we
perceived dark energy acceleration is
aligned in one direction and if you look
at right angles to that direction at the
supernovae that are off that axis you
don't see the acceleration effect at all
and that that dark energy alignment that
acceleration vector that's shown in blue
on the top charts marked on top of the
smooth cosmic microwave background
radiation appears to point in a
direction where there's an asymmetry and
where the solar system is moving in that
direction anyway and that gives that red
blue Doppler shift to the cosmic
microwaves so it could be that the
entire dark energy measurement was an
artifact of the fact that the supernovae
they were looking at just happened to be
aligned fore and aft relative to our
direction of motion and so the universe
could be confusing us and there's
another third way which we could be
confusing us if our region of space our
local Group of galaxies is a bit light
and a bit under dense and that could
distort our view and yet another write
it has come up which maybe is that the
universe is actually ringing like a bell
in its expansion and oscillating now
that's based on trying to extrapolate
the data perhaps a little bit too far
but overall I am becoming very
suspicious that this dark energy might
not be quite as solid a piece of science
as maybe the Nobel Committee thought it
was and well I don't think they asked
for the Nobel Prizes back but we just
gotta wait and see let's see how this
latest round of evidence pans out so I
think the answer to what is the destiny
of the universe is frankly we just don't
know at this point
so